---
slug: beginners-guide-to-react-part-1
date: 2019-03-03
title: "Beginners Guide to React.js (Part 1)"
description:
  "If you’re a beginner web developer and have been interested in learning
  React, then you’re in the right place. React is an incredibly powerful
  JavaScript framework that allows developers to utilize component-driven
  development to create incredible front-end user interfaces. In this tutorial,
  you will learn the basic concepts of React while building a real-world
  application."
published: true
author: "Sam Gamage"
---

If you’re a beginner web developer and have been interested in learning React,
then you’re in the right place. React is an incredibly powerful JavaScript
framework that allows developers to utilize component-driven development to
create incredible front-end user interfaces. In this tutorial, you will learn
the basic concepts of React while building a real-world application.

Before we get started, let’s go over what I expect you to know before jumping
into this tutorial. As a beginner web developer, I expect you to know the
barebone basics of:

- Vanilla JavaScript (functions, parameters, objects, and arrays)

- ES6 JavaScript (arrow functions, classes, destructuring, and higher-order
  components)

- npm (node package manager)

With that out of the way, let’s get started.

## What we will be making

In this tutorial, we will be making a simple todo-list app which demonstrates
the four basic actions of a dynamic web application known as CRUD (Create, Read,
Update, and Delete). By the end of this tutorial, you will be able to understand
the basic concepts of React like components, state, properties, life-cycle
methods, and much more.

Here is what our application will look like when we are done:

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2000/1*CI7fSYdCSxWUTmqEIZ-67Q.gif)

So, without further ado, let’s get started.

## The stack

The stack for this application will consist of these five packages:

- React (16.8.3)

- Material-UI (core@3.9.2, icons@3.0.2)

- PropTypes (15.7.2)

- DayJS (1.8.8)

- UUID (3.3.2)

## Installing…

Alright, let’s go ahead and get some things installed. First things first, you
need to have node installed on your machine. You can do this either through a
package manager such as homebrew for macOS or installing directly from their
website. I advise all windows users to install Node.js directly from their
website. Follow one of the links below to install whichever one you choose.
[**Node.js** *Node.js® is a JavaScript runtime built on Chrome’s V8 JavaScript engine.*nodejs.org](https://nodejs.org/en/)
[**Homebrew** *The missing package manager for macOS (or Linux).*brew.sh](https://brew.sh/)

If you chose to download node through their website, run the installer and go
through the process as normal.

If you chose homebrew for macOS, run this command after installing:

    brew install node

If you have issues with installing node through homebrew, check out this link
below.
[**How to install NodeJS and NPM on Mac using Homebrew — How to Mac — DYclassroom | Have fun learning…** *In this tutorial we will learn to install NodeJS and NPM on Mac using Homebrew.*www.dyclassroom.com](https://www.dyclassroom.com/howto-mac/how-to-install-nodejs-and-npm-on-mac-using-homebrew)

> **Note\***:\* npm (node package manager) and npx comes bundled with the
> Node.js package

Alright now that we have node installed, we are going to be using it to start up
our application through a boiler-plate developed by the React team called
create-react-app.

Navigate to the folder that you want to create your application in and run this
command in your terminal:

    npx create-create-app react-todo-tutorial

> **Note**: The last parameter for this command is the name of your application
> which can be whatever you want.

The reason why we are using npx instead of installing create-react-app globally
with npm is that npx always uses the latest version of create-react-app and is a
workaround for global npm installs.

After this command is done executing you should be met with a boiler-plate
application under the name you specified in the command above. The next step is
to change directories into your project by running this command:

    cd todo-list-react

Now, while you are in the root directory, run this command:

    npm install

> **Note**: running npm install could take a while, be patient.

After npm is done installing everything, run this command while you are still in
the root directory which will start up the development server:

    npm start

After the server starts up you should be met with a screen that looks like this:

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/3104/1*lqhkhetBTd36ehOovkDiiA.png)

Alright, now that we got our development server up and running we are going to
want to install the dependencies we are gonna use in this application.

Open up your terminal once again and navigate to your projects root directory
and run this command which will install all of the dependencies we will need:

    npm install --save @material-ui/core@3.9.2 @material-ui/icons@3.0.2 prop-types@15.7.2 dayjs@1.8.8 uuid@3.3.2

## Getting rid of errors

Alright, now that we have everything installed we can now focus on getting all
of the red errors to go away.

Navigate to the src folder in your project directory and delete the following
files: App.css, App.test.js, index.css, and logo.svg.

Next, navigate to src/index.js and get rid of the import which contains
index.css .

<iframe
  src="https://medium.com/media/b90577e29fbce15c7927339b61f890c8"
  frameborder={0}
></iframe>

Next, navigate to src/App.js and make the following changes to get rid of the
errors:

- Delete both of the import lines containing logo.svg and App.css

- Replace everything inside the <header> element with a <p> element that says
  “Hello from todo app”

- Convert the class to a function

- Rename App.js to App.jsx
  > **Note**: by default, create-react-app can handle .jsx file extensions.
  > **You may need to restart the server** in order for the compiler to see
  > these changes.

Your App.jsx file should now look something like this:

<iframe src="https://medium.com/media/550d0b594a7784290578c7afa5c00732" frameborder={0}></iframe>
> **Note**: I chose to use an arrow function here but you could have used a simple vanilla JavaScript function App() instead.

The reason why we want to convert our App component into a function is that it
doesn't use any state or lifecycle methods, therefore, making it useless as a
class component! More on this in the next part.

When you start the server again you should be met with a screen that looks like
this:

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/3104/1*hXnDvJwqWaq3NqGQ-Bid_Q.png)

Nice! No more errors! Now that we have our application all set up we can finally
start developing some real components that we will use in our todo-list.

In the next part, we are going to write our first custom component for our
application and go over some basic concepts in React such as the concept of
class vs. functional components and local state.

Here is a link to the GitHub page where I will push all of my code to:
[**samgamage/react-todo-tutorial** *Todo-list application made with react for a tutorial series. - samgamage/react-todo-tutorial*github.com](https://github.com/samgamage/react-todo-tutorial)

If you got lost at any point in this article check out the React docs for more
help:
[**Getting Started — React** *A JavaScript library for building user interfaces*reactjs.org](https://reactjs.org/docs/getting-started.html)
